mi
mi
(U) WORLDWIDE: Worldwide Threat to Shipping (WTS) Report 26 December
2019-29 January 2020

31 January 2020

(U) Table of Contents

1. (U) Scope Note

2. (U) Warnings and Advisories

3. (U) Summary

4. (U) Counter-Piracy and Maritime Crime Announcements and Advisories
5. (U) Details: Monthly Incidents by Region

6. (U) Appendix A: Further Contact Information and Resources

7. (U) Appendix B: Terminology and References
1. (U) Scope Note

(U) The Worldwide Threat to Shipping (WTS) message provides information on threats to merchant vessels, the
shipping industry, and other maritime stakeholders worldwide in the last 30 days. This report is produced primarily to
inform merchant mariners and naval forces.

2. (U) Warnings and Advisories:

1. (U) MARAD MSCI Alert 2020-002A — Global - Novel Coronavirus Outbreak: Description: A health threat
potentially affecting mariners and maritime commerce has been identified which was first detected in Wuhan,
China. The nature of the event is an outbreak of respiratory illness caused by a novel coronavirus
("2019-nCoV") and is being monitored by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC)
(https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html). Coronaviruses range in severity from the common
cold to Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS). The CDC
has issued a Level 3 Travel Health Warning to avoid nonessential travel to Wuhan, China
(https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices/warning/novel-coronavirus-wuhan-china) and a Level 1 Travel Health
Watch to practice usual precautions elsewhere in China
(https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices/watch/novel-coronavirus-china). The U.S. Department of State has also
issued several travel advisories on this outbreak including a Level 4 Advisory: “Do not travel to Hubei province,
China, due to novel coronavirus first identified in Wuhan, China”
(https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/international-travel/International-Travel-Country-InformationPages/China.html). This is a rapidly changing situation and we are still learning about the new virus. The U.S.

UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED

government is monitoring the situation closely and anticipates updating its recommendations and guidance as needed.
Globally, ports are taking actions including health screenings of seafarers for 2019-nCoV and restricting access to
Wuhan Port in China. Further updates will be provided when available. This alert will automatically expire on 31 January
2020. Any maritime industry questions regarding this alert should be directed to GMCC@uscg.mil. For more
information about U.S. Maritime Alerts and Advisories, including subscription details, please visit
http://www.marad.dot.gov/MSCI.

. (U) UKMTO NOTICE 004 JAN 2020. UKMTO is issuing this notice to global maritime operators in order to remind

mariners and ship operators of the recommended procedures for transiting the Strait of Hormuz. BMP5 remains the
basis for merchant ship conduct, reporting, and monitoring in the area. In addition, vessels and companies will need to
be aware of their own Flag State guidance. All vessels are strongly advised to remain within International Waters and,
where practicable, should avoid transiting through Iranian TTW, including the areas claimed by Iran around the islands
of Abu Musa (25:52N - 055:02E), Greater Tunb (26:15N - 055:16E), and Lesser Tunb (26:14N - 055:08E). In the event of
merchant vessels being hailed, masters should respond with ship's name, flag state and confirm that they are
proceeding in accordance with International Law. If contacted by Iranian authorities, it is recommended that masters
contact UKMTO. UKMTO recommends all merchant shipping maintain transmissions on AIS throughout the region to
avoid mis-identification and to assist with merchant shipping monitoring. UKMTO Watchkeeper email:
watchkeepers@ukmto.org; emergency tel: +44 (0)2392 222060; emergency tel: +971 5055 23215; general inquiries: +44
(0)2392 222065.

3. (U) Summary

—_—

Hn Ww ff W

10.

. (U) PERU: On 28 January, two individuals in skiffs boarded an anchored tanker in Callao Anchorage.
. (U) ATLANTIC OCEAN: On 27 January, Portuguese forces announced that they had intercepted a sailing yacht in the

north Atlantic carrying 1,820 kilograms of cocaine.

. (U) NIGERIA: On 25 January, robbers boarded a tanker during cargo operations while anchored in Lagos Anchorage.

. (U) INDONESIA: On 22 January, robbers boarded a bulk carrier anchored in Taboneo Anchorage.

. (U) NIGERIA: On 21 January, a merchant vessel was attacked 20 NM south of Brass.

. (U) COLOMBIA: On 20 January, an unknown number of heavily armed pirates boarded a yacht and shot dead a civilian

near the coast of Cauca Department in the Pacific Ocean.

. (U) COLOMBIA: On 19 January, two robbers armed with machetes boarded a tanker anchored near position 10:19N 
075:31W, Cartagena Anchorage.

. (U) BENIN: On 19 January, armed individuals in a skiff boarded a merchant vessel 80 NM south of Cotonou using a long

ladder.

. (U) NIGERIA: On 17 January, robbers in a small boat attempted to board an anchored tanker during cargo operations in

the Lagos Secure Anchorage Area.

(U) INDIA: On 7 January, persons in a small boat boarded a barge anchored near position 21:23N - 072:17E, Alang
Anchorage.

4. (U) Details: Monthly Incidents by Region

(U) This section lists reports of active violence against shipping, credible threats to shipping, or the potential for a situation to
develop into a direct threat to shipping over the past 30 days. Every effort is made to ensure that incidents are not
double-counted. In the event that double-counting is detected, or an incident is later found to be different than initially
reported, an explanation of the cancellation of the inaccurate report will be made in at least one message prior to dropping
the erroneous report.

A.

(U) NORTH AMERICA:

UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED

(U) No current incidents to report.

B. (U) CENTRAL AMERICA - CARIBBEAN - SOUTH AMERICA:

UNCLASSIFIED
Kidnapping

3

Attempted boarding/
Fired upon

Boarding

UNCLASSIFIED

(U) Figure 1. Central America - Caribbean - South America Piracy and Maritime Crime

1. (U) PERU: On 28 January, two individuals in skiffs boarded an anchored tanker near position 12:00S - 077:10W, Callao
Anchorage. When the duty watchman on security rounds spotted the individuals on the forecastle deck, the alarm was
raised and crew was mustered. Seeing the crew's response, the individuals jumped overboard and escaped. Port
authorities were notified. Nothing reported stolen during the boarding. (IMB)

2. (U) COLOMBIA: On 20 January, an unknown number of heavily armed pirates boarded a yacht and shot dead a civilian
near the coast of Cauca Department in the Pacific Ocean. According to navy officers, the pirates boarded the vessel,
which was navigating toward Lopez de Micay, and stole personal belongings from three individuals before killing one
person. The assailants threw the victim's body into the sea and escaped on a small boat. (www.pviltd.com)

3. (U) COLOMBIA: On 19 January, two robbers armed with machetes boarded a tanker anchored near position 10:19N 075:31W, Cartagena Anchorage. The alarm was raised and crew was mustered. Upon seeing the crew's response,
the robbers fled. The incident was reported to the Colombia Coast Guard who came to investigate. An investigation
determined that nothing was stolen by the robbers. (IMB)

UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED

4. (U) ECUADOR: On 7 January, Ecuador Navy personnel boarded and inspected the Liberia-flagged container vessel
SEALAND LOS ANGELES in the Port of Puerto Bolivar. During the inspection, authorities found 88 packages of cocaine
stashed in a container. (www.fleetmon.com)

5. (U) DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: On 29 December, a sailing yacht was boarded after being thoroughly inspected by local
customs officers in Luperon Port. During their inspection, they asked for, and were given, a small ‘gratuity.’ Later that
evening, the boarding occurred; a jewelry box was ransacked and most items were stolen. No police report was made.
(www.safetyandsecuritynet.org)

C. (U) ATLANTIC OCEAN AREA:

‘a7

Kidnapping |
otheracviy |
Attempted boardin f
Boarding |
Hijacking |

UNCLASSIFIED ” Ay = i ae oe

(U) Figure 2. Atlantic Ocean Area Piracy and Maritime Crime

1. (U) ATLANTIC OCEAN: On 27 January, Portuguese forces announced that they had intercepted a sailing yacht in the
north Atlantic carrying 1,820 kilograms of cocaine. Two men aboard the yacht were arrested.
(www.theportugalnews.com)

D. (U) NORTHERN EUROPE - BALTIC:
(U) No current incidents to report.

(U) MEDITERRANEAN - BLACK SEA:

UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED

(U) No current incidents to report.

F. (U) WEST AFRICA:

ae Bzgcneeetoe! FS
3 evan
| iene
ered

UNCLASSIFIED

(U) Figure 3. West Africa Piracy and Maritime Crime

1. (U) NIGERIA: On 25 January, a robbers boarded a tanker during cargo operations while anchored near position 06:16N
- 003:19E, Lagos Anchorage. When a duty crewman spotted the robbers near the forecastle, the alarm was sounded.
Seeing the crew response, the robbers jumped overboard and fled in a wooden boat. A naval patrol boat arrived at the
location, searched the waters around the tanker, and remained close to the tanker until daybreak. Nothing was
reported stolen during the boarding. (IMB)

2. (U) NIGERIA: On 21 January, a merchant vessel was attacked near position 04:04N - 005:47E, 20 NM south of Brass.
Crew and vessel were reported safe. (www.pviltd.com)

UNCLASSIFIED
4.

10.

11.

12.

13:

14.

fis

16.

UNCLASSIFIED

(U) BENIN: On 19 January, armed individuals in a skiff boarded a merchant vessel near position 05:08N - 002:17E using a
long ladder. No further information is available. (www.pviltd.com)

(U) NIGERIA: On 17 January, robbers in a small boat approached an anchored tanker during cargo operations in the
Lagos Secure Anchorage Area. Two of the robbers attempted to board the tanker via the anchor chain. A duty
crewman on routine rounds noticed the robbers and raised the alarm. Crew mustered and informed a patrol boat.
Seeing the crew's response, the robbers aborted the attempted boarding and fled. Authorities were notified. (IMB)

. (U) NIGERIA: On 22 January, eight crew members, kidnapped by Nigerian pirates from the Greek tanker HAPPY

LADY on 30 December, were released. (www.fleetmon.com)

. (U) NIGERIA: On 21 January, Panama-flagged container ship MSC GRACE reported being attacked by approximately 15

armed individuals in a skiff near position 04:04N - 005:47E, 20 NM south of Bonny. The vessel increased speed
and non-essential crew members took shelter in the citadel. When armed naval guards onboard the MSC GRACE
returned fire, the skiff aborted the attack and departed the area. The Nigerian Navy was notified. (IMB;
www.sguardian.com; www.fleetmon.com)

. (U) NIGERIA: On 20 January, a merchant vessel reported being attacked by six individuals in a skiff near position

05:30N - 003:41E, 57 NM southeast of Lagos. (www.sguardian.com)

. (U) BENIN: On 20 January, Marshall Islands-flagged container ship ATLANTIC DISCOVERER reported being attacked

near position 05:08N - 002:17E, 75 NM south-southwest of Cotonou. (www.sguardian.com; www.fleetmon.com)

. (U) NIGERIA: On 19 January, 19 of the 20 seafarers, kidnapped on 15 December from the tanker DUKE, were released.

One able seaman died shortly after capture. Following release, the crew members had medical checks and are reported
to be well, given the circumstances of their ordeal. They will be debriefed by local authorities and then return home to
their families. (www.maritime-executive.com)

(U) NIGERIA: On 16 January, five armed pirates in a small craft approached a tanker underway near position 03:38N 006:40E, 52 NM southwest of Bonny. The crew raised the alarm and began evasive maneuvers. When the security team
on the tanker fired warning shots, the pirates returned fire and departed the area. (IMB)

(U) NIGERIA: On 12 January, four Chinese nationals abducted by pirates during a late December attack in waters off
Owendo Port in Libreville, Gabon's capital, were rescued in Nigeria. The Chinese consulate to Lagos confirmed. The four
kidnapped Chinese crewmen, working for fishing company Sigapeche, were taken by pirates who attacked two
company vessels on 22 December. (Xinhua)

(U) NIGERIA: On 2 January, robbers attacked the Nigeria-flagged dredger vessel AMBIKA near position 05:07N 005:20E, 3 NM from the mouth of the Ramos River. There was a heavy exchange of gunfire between the embarked
security personnel on AMBIKA and the pirates, during which four security guards were killed and two injured. After the
firefight, the pirates boarded the vessel and kidnapped three crew members, leaving behind five sailors. Two of the
abducted men are Russians, and one is Indian. On 7 January, Nigerian military forces rescued the men, killing several of
the kidnappers (www.gcaptain.com; www.worldmaritimenews.com; www.oilprice.com)

(U) CAMEROON: On 30 December, gunmen boarded and kidnapped eight crew members (five Greeks, two Filipinos,
and one Ukrainian) from the Greece-flagged tanker HAPPY LADY while anchored 2 miles off Limboh Terminal,

Cameroon. One Greek crew member was injured during the attack when a stray bullet fired by a gunman struck him.
He was later taken to a local hospital. (IMB; www.arxmaritime.com; www.hellenicshippingnews.com)

(U) NIGERIA: On 30 December, pirates attacked and boarded the Singapore-flagged bulk carrier DROGBA in the Bight
of Bonny, 45 NM south-southwest of Bonny while en route from Lagos to Port Harcourt, Nigeria. The pirates fled after
encountering an embarked Nigerian Navy armed security team. The ship reached Port Harcourt later that evening.
(www.fleetmon.com)

(U) GULF OF GUINEA: On 30 December, three pirates attacked and boarded Vietnam-flagged bulk carrier VINALINES
MIGHTY approximately 150 NM northwest of Sao Tome. All crew are safe. (www.fleetmon.com)

(U) GULF OF GUINEA: On 28 December, pirates attacked the Bermuda-flagged tanker LNG LUKOJA in Gulf of Guinea 70
NM northwest of Sao Tome, while en route Bonny, Nigeria. The tanker crew managed to avoid a pirate boarding

UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED

through evasive maneuvers. The Nigerian Navy vessel DEFENDER 6 responded and escorted the tanker to
Bonny. (www.fleetmon.com)

17. (U) NIGERIA: On 26 December, authorities from the Indian High Commission in Abuja, Nigeria, stated that the
government of India has established contact with pirates who kidnapped 20 Indian crew members from the Marshall
Islands-flagged tanker DUKE off Benin on 15 December. All crew members are reportedly alive.
(www.worldmaritimenews.com)

G. (U) ARABIAN GULF:
(U) No current incidents to report.
H. (U) INDIAN OCEAN - EAST AFRICA - RED SEA:

Pea)
ai UNCLASSIFIED

Pet isu Attempted boardin
Pears Screen coasts ba] hid ete Fired upon o

(U) Figure 4. Indian Piracy and Maritime Crime

1. (U) INDIA: On 7 January, robbers in a small boat boarded a barge anchored near position 21:23N - 072:17E, Alang
Anchorage. The robbers stole scrap metal and escaped. The master reported the incident to the local authorities who
managed to apprehend the thieves. (IMB)

2. (U) MOZAMBIQUE: On 13 January, a duty watchman on rounds onboard a cargo vessel anchored near position 14:22S 040:42E, Nacala Anchorage, spotted two robbers armed with long knives approaching him. He immediately informed

UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED

the duty officer, who raised the alarm. During a subsequent check of the vessel, the crew discovered a long rope
missing from the forward store room. (IMB)

3. (U) GULF OF ADEN: On 11 January, a merchant vessel near position 12:05N - 045:24E, 44 NM southeast of Aden,
Yemen, reported a suspicious approach by seven high-speed crafts with four persons onboard each craft. (UKMTO;
www.sguardian.com)

4, (U) ARABIAN SEA: On 25 November, a U.S. Navy warship intercepted a small ship, which was found to be carrying
"advanced missile components” on a stateless vessel and an initial investigation indicated the parts were of Iranian
Origin. The crew on the small boat have been transferred to the Yemeni Coast Guard and the missile parts are in the
possession of the United States. (www.reuters.com)

5. (U) STRAIT OF HORMUZ: On 30 December, Iran detained a ship purportedly carrying smuggled fuel near the entrance
to the Strait of Hormuz according to state-run Islamic Republic News Agency. Sixteen Malaysian crew members were
detained. According to the Iranian state media, the tanker was intercepted near Abu Musa island transporting 1.3
million liters of smuggled fuel or the equivalent of 8,000 barrels. (www.gcaptain.com)

|. (U) EAST ASIA - SOUTHEAST ASIA - INDIAN SUBCONTINENT:

UNCLASSIFIED

Kidnapping

Attempted boarding/
Fired pal .

UNCLASSIFIED

(U) Figure 5. Southeast Asia Piracy and Maritime Crime

UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED

. (U) INDONESIA: On 22 January, a duty crewman onboard a bulk carrier anchored near position 03:42.6S - 114:25.2E,
Taboneo Anchorage, saw that the lock on the bosun store room was broken and some of ship's properties were stolen.
The incident was reported to port control and a local agent. (IMB)

—_—

2. (U) MALAYSIA: On 21 January, Malaysia-flagged fishing vessel, SSK 00543/F, was attacked by six armed persons wearing
dark clothing and masks in a grey-colored speed boat near position 05:29N - 119:03E, approximately 4 NM northwest
of Tambisan, Lahad Datu, Sabah, Malaysia. Malaysian authorities responded and found three crew members on the
fishing vessel, but five other crew members had been kidnapped. (www.pna.gov.ph; www.pviltd.com)

3. (U) INDONESIA: On 21 January, four robbers boarded the Indonesian tanker HORIZON MARU in Kabil waters, eastern
Batam Island, Indonesia. The crew managed to fight the robbers off and capture one of them in the process. One
crewman suffered an injury to his face during the skirmish. The captured robber was handed over to police.
(www.fleetmon.com)

4. (U) INDONESIA: On 13 January, a duty watchman on routine rounds onboard a bulk carrier anchored near position 05:
30S - 105:17E, Panjang Anchorage, noticed the steering room lock was open and engine spares were missing. The
incident was reported to a local agent. (IMB)

5. (U) SINGAPORE STRAIT: On 28 December, the chief engineer onboard a bulk carrier underway near position 01:16.2N 104:13.4E spotted four robbers armed with knives in the engine room. The alarm was raised, deck lights switched on,
and crew mustered. Upon seeing the crew response, the robbers fled. When a search was carried out, footprints were
noticed on the quarter deck, but nothing was stolen. (IMB).

J. (U) NORTHEAST ASIA:

1. (U) EAST CHINA SEA: On 27 December, the government of Japan provided the UN Security Council Sanctions
Committee with evidence that the North Korean regime is engaging in illegal ship-to-ship transfers of goods in
violation of UN sanctions. Tokyo's foreign ministry said that one of Japan's maritime patrol planes spotted a North
Korea-flagged crude oil tanker and another vessel on 16 and 17 December in the East China Sea off the coast of
Shanghai. The ministry said the two vessels were linked together with a hose. (www.arirang.co.kr)

K. (U) AUSTRALIA - NEW ZEALAND - PACIFIC OCEAN AREA:

(U) No current incidents to report.
5. (U) Appendix A: Further Contact Information and Resources

(U) This appendix provides contact information for the author of the WTS as well as other entities that can be contacted with
maritime crime reports. It also lists other resources where the WTS is posted and where piracy and maritime crime incident
information can be found.

(U) Contact

(U) Originator of this WTS report requests consumer feedback. Originator will incorporate all anti-shipping events and
violence against the maritime industry into this weekly message where appropriate. To aid in our reporting, please add the
Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI) to your normal corporate and organizational reporting requirements. The 24-hour watch
can be reached at +1 (301) 669-4053.

(U) Other Resources

(U) This Worldwide Threat to Shipping (WTS) report is posted at the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency's Maritime
Safety site: http://msi.nga.mil/NGAPortal/MSI|.portal. The International Maritime Bureau (IMB) also publishes a live piracy
report based on reporting from the IMB Piracy Reporting Centre in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, listing all piracy and armed
robbery incidents in the last ten days: http://www.icc-ccs.org/. The Weekly Piracy Update and WTS reports are posted weekly
on the ONI Intel Portal: http://www.oni.navy.mil/Intelligence_Community/piracy.htm.

UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED
6. (U) Appendix B: Terminology and References

(U) This appendix is provided to promote consistent use of accurate terms of reference in reporting and also identifies those
references that were used to gather the information contained in this report. ONI welcomes comment and suggestions for
addition or amendment.

(U) Terminology

(U) In order to promote consistent use of accurate terms of reference, the following have been adopted to describe the range
of criminal anti-shipping activity and impediments to safe navigation in our worldwide reporting and analysis. Please note that
these terms relate to observable activity and are independent of target vessel status and exclude actions by governmental
powers in lawful pursuit of their authorities:

(U) The following terms have been adopted to describe the range of criminal anti-shipping activity and impediments to safe
navigation in our worldwide reporting and analysis:

e (U) Attempted Boarding - Close approach or hull-to-hull contact with report that boarding paraphernalia were
employed or visible in the approaching boat.

e (U) Blocking - Hampering safe navigation, docking, or undocking of a vessel as a means of protest.

e (U) Boarding - Unauthorized embarkation of a vessel by persons not part of its complement without successfully
taking control of the vessel.

e (U) Fired Upon - Weapons discharged at or toward a vessel.
® (U) Hijacking - Unauthorized seizure and retention of a vessel by persons not part of its complement.
e (U) Kidnapping - Unauthorized forcible removal of persons belonging to the vessel from it.
e (U) Robbery - Theft from a vessel or from persons aboard the vessel.
e (U) Suspicious Approach - All other unexplained activity in close proximity by an unknown vessel.
(U) Sourcing

e Agence France Presse (AFP)

e Associated Press (AP)

e BBC News

¢ DNK Intelligence & Operations Centre (DNK IOC)

e EU Naval Forces (EU)

e FLEETMON

e International Maritime Bureau (IMB), London and Kuala Lumpur

e International Maritime Organization (IMO), London

e Lloyd's

e Maritime Administration (MARAD), U.S.

e Maritime Security Centre - Horn of Africa (MSCHOA)

e Marine Domain Awareness for Trade - Gulf of Guinea (MDAT- GoG)
e Maritime Asset Security and Training (MAST) Ltd

¢ National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA), Navigation Safety System

e Noonsite.com (Noonsite), website

UNCLASSIFIED
10
UNCLASSIFIED
e Norwegian Shipowners’ Mutual War Risks Insurance Association

* Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia, Information Sharing
Center (ReCAAP ISC)

e Reuters

e Royal Australian Navy (RAN)

e Royal New Zealand Navy (RNZN)

e The Maritime Executive (website)

e United Kingdom Maritime Trade Organization (UKMTO)

e United Press International (UPI)

e U.S. Coast Guard (USCG)
(U) The Weekly Piracy Update (WPU) and WTS reports are posted each week on the ONI Intel Portal and can be found at:
http://www.oni.navy.mil/News/Weekly-Piracy-Reports/

(U) ICOD: 29 January 2020

UNCLASSIFIED
11
